---
title: State of the Pacific Ocean in 2017
author: Brett Johnson
date: 2018-03-07
slug: state-of-the-pacific-ocean
subtitle: 'Nanaimo, BC'
---


# Background

Every year Fisheries and Oceans Canada hosts a State of the Pacific Ocean Conference in British Columbia to summarize the previous years ocean and climate conditions. This meeting always puts in perspective for me just how real climate change is, how rapidly it's occurring, and highlights the wide-spread and often un-anticipated impacts. 

Most scientists present 2017 results in reference to their long-term time series, focusing on anomalies and deviations from the long-term average. As such there is little interpretation of results, but rather an opportunity to say here's what I found. The meeting serves as an opportunity for ocean scientists, climatologists, and biologists to rapidly share their observations of the Pacific Ocean with each other. Fisheries and Oceans Scientists use the meeting as an opportunity to produce a State of the Oceans report to Fisheries and Oceans Canada management, to summarize the findings reported at the meeting. 

From this rapid bringing together of results, scientists start conversations with each other and form hypotheses to try to explain why we see such patterns and what the implications are. The conference is premised on the fact that due to the rapid nature of this reporting, the results are preliminary and require further quality control.

## Summary 

I'll summarize some of the most interesting and startling points from the State of the Ocean in 2017. Remember to look at the [official reports](http://www.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/oceans/publications/index-eng.html) for the referenced facts.

* Sea surface temperature in the North East Pacific was 0.5 degrees C warmer than normal, to put this in perspective; an increase in 1 degree Celsius in the Ocean is equivalent to the heat energy required to raise the atmosphere by 40 degrees.
* Current rate of Ocean temperatures rise is 0.81 °C every 100 years
* Land temp and hydrological services of B.C. show increasing precipitation and increasing temps annually
* 2017 was expected to be a cold year in the NE Pacific due to La Nina, but rather than moderating temperatures down to a colder than normal year, La Nina seemed to moderate the ocean temperatures down to only a normal level in 2017.
* Sea surface temperature anomaly termed 'the blob' disappeared in 2017
* 2017 was the third warmest year globally on record 
* Peak Fraser River discharge is occurring earlier and earlier on average.

Check out previous years State of the Ocean Reports [here](http://www.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/oceans/publications/index-eng.html) and look for the official 2018 report when it becomes available.


 
